
This is the accessible text file for GAO report number GAO-10-956T 
entitled 'Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: Payment Errors 
and Trafficking Have Declined, but Challenges Remain' which was 
released on July 28, 2010. 

This text file was formatted by the U.S. Government Accountability 
Office (GAO) to be accessible to users with visual impairments, as 
part of a longer term project to improve GAO products' accessibility. 
Every attempt has been made to maintain the structural and data 
integrity of the original printed product. Accessibility features, 
such as text descriptions of tables, consecutively numbered footnotes 
placed at the end of the file, and the text of agency comment letters, 
are provided but may not exactly duplicate the presentation or format 
of the printed version. The portable document format (PDF) file is an 
exact electronic replica of the printed version. We welcome your 
feedback. Please E-mail your comments regarding the contents or 
accessibility features of this document to Webmaster@gao.gov. 

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright 
protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed 
in its entirety without further permission from GAO. Because this work 
may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the 
copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this 
material separately. 

Testimony: 

Before the Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, 
Nutrition, and Forestry, Committee on Agriculture, U.S. House of 
Representatives: 

United States Government Accountability Office: 
GAO: 

For Release on Delivery: 
Expected at 10:00 a.m. EDT:
Wednesday, July 28, 2010: 

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: 

Payment Errors and Trafficking Have Declined, but Challenges Remain: 

Statement of Kay E. Brown, Director: 
Education, Workforce, and Income Security Issues: 

GAO-10-956T: 

GAO Highlights: 

Highlights of GAO-10-956T, a report to the House Subcommittee on 
Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, Committee 
on Agriculture. 

Why GAO Did This Study: 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program (SNAP) is intended to help low-income individuals 
and families obtain a better diet by supplementing their income with 
benefits to purchase food. USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) and 
the states jointly implement SNAP. Participation in the program has 
risen steadily over the last decade to an all time high of more than 
33 million in fiscal year 2009, providing critical assistance to 
families in need. 

This testimony discusses GAO’s past work on three issues related to 
ensuring integrity of the program: (1) improper payments to SNAP 
participants, (2) trafficking of SNAP benefits, and (3) categorical 
eligibility for certain individuals or households. 

This testimony is based on prior GAO reports on categorical 
eligibility (GAO-07-465), payment errors (GAO-05-245), and food stamp 
trafficking (GAO-07-53), developed through data analyses, case file 
reviews, site visits, interviews with officials, and a 50-state 
survey. GAO also updated data where available and collected 
information on recent USDA actions and policy changes. 

What GAO Found: 

The national payment error rate reported for SNAP, which combines 
states’ overpayments and underpayments to program participants, has 
declined by 56 percent from 1999 to 2009, from 9.86 percent to a 
record low of 4.36 percent. This reduction is due, in part, to options 
made available to states that simplified certain program rules. In 
addition, FNS and the states GAO reviewed have taken several steps to 
improve SNAP payment accuracy that are consistent with internal 
control practices known to reduce improper payments such as providing 
financial incentives and penalties based on performance. Despite this 
progress, the amount of SNAP benefits paid in error is substantial, 
totaling about $2.2 billion in 2009 and necessitating continued top-
level attention and commitment to determining the causes of improper 
payments and taking corrective actions to reduce them. 

FNS estimates indicate that the national rate of food stamp 
trafficking declined from about 3.8 cents per dollar of benefits 
redeemed in 1993 to about 1.0 cent per dollar during the years 2002 to 
2005 but that trafficking occurs more frequently in smaller stores. 
FNS has taken advantage of electronic benefit transfer to reduce 
fraud, and in response to prior GAO recommendations, has implemented 
new technology and categorized stores based on risk to improve its 
ability to detect trafficking and disqualify retailers who traffic. 
FNS also received authority to impose increased financial penalties 
for trafficking as recommended; however, it has not yet assessed 
higher penalties because implementing regulations are not yet 
finalized. FNS is considering additional steps to encourage states to 
pursue recipients suspected of trafficking but limited state resources 
are a constraint. 

Categorically eligible households do not need to meet SNAP eligibility 
requirements because their need has been established under the states’ 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. As of June 
2010, 36 states have opted to provide categorical eligibility for SNAP 
to any household found eligible for a service funded through TANF and, 
in 35 states, there is no limit on the amount of assets certain 
households may have to be determined eligible, according to FNS. 
Households can be categorically eligible for SNAP even if they receive 
no TANF funded service other than a toll-free telephone number or 
informational brochure. However, the amount of assistance eligible 
households receive is determined using the same process used for other 
SNAP recipients. According to FNS officials, increased use of 
categorical eligibility by states has reduced administrative burdens 
and increased access to SNAP benefits to households who would not 
otherwise be eligible due to asset or income limits. However, little 
is known about the extent of its impact on increased access or program 
integrity. 

SNAP has played a key role in assisting families facing hardship 
during the economic crisis, but given fiscal constraints and program 
growth, it is more important than ever to understand the impact of 
policy changes, and balance improvements in access with efforts to 
ensure accountability. 

What GAO Recommends: 

FNS generally agreed with GAO’s prior recommendations to address SNAP 
trafficking and categorical eligibility issues and has taken action in 
response to most of them. 

View [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10-956T] or key 
components. For more information, contact Kay Brown at (202) 512-7215 
or brownk@gao.gov. 

[End of section] 

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: 

Thank you for inviting me here today to discuss issues related to the 
integrity of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly the Food Stamp Program. 
SNAP is intended to help low-income individuals and families obtain a 
better diet by supplementing their income with benefits to purchase 
food. Participation in SNAP has risen steadily over the last decade in 
response to economic conditions and has played a critical role in 
assisting families facing hardship. In fiscal year 2000, SNAP provided 
about $15 billion in benefits to about 17 million individuals while in 
fiscal year 2009, it provided more than $50 billion in benefits to 
nearly 34 million individuals. The recent economic crisis has sharply 
increased demand for such assistance, with participation in SNAP 
increasing by 22 percent from June 2008 to June 2009 alone. Currently, 
almost 1 in every 11 Americans participates in the program. Further, 
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 provided a 
temporary across-the-board increase to the SNAP benefit amount. 
[Footnote 1] This recent growth highlights the importance of ensuring 
program integrity. Every year, more than $1 billion in benefits are 
paid incorrectly. Further, SNAP recipients exchange hundreds of 
millions of dollars in benefits for cash instead of food with 
authorized retailers across the country, a practice known as 
trafficking. In addition, concerns have been raised about a policy 
option allowing states to give households automatic eligibility for 
SNAP if they are eligible for minimal services financed with Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) funds (a type of categorical 
eligibility). 

The information I am presenting today is based on past work, updated 
with current information where available, on three issues related to 
ensuring integrity of the program: (1) improper payments to SNAP 
participants, (2) trafficking of SNAP benefits, and (3) categorical 
eligibility for SNAP benefits.[Footnote 2] The payment error and 
trafficking findings are based on past analyses of program quality 
control data, case file reviews, data analysis of the Food and 
Nutrition Service (FNS) retailer database, and interviews and site 
visits with program stakeholders, including federal agency and state 
and local officials. The categorical eligibility findings are based on 
a 2007 survey of state SNAP administrators, an analysis of household 
characteristic data collected from 21 states, and interviews and site 
visits with federal and state officials. More complete information on 
the scope and methodology for our prior work is available in each 
published report. In addition, we updated data where available, 
reviewed recent USDA policy changes and actions taken in response to 
our recommendations, and discussed the implications of these actions 
and changes with USDA officials. We also reviewed relevant federal 
laws and regulations. We conducted this work in accordance with 
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards 
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, 
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings 
and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the 
evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and 
conclusions. 

Background: 

SNAP is jointly administered by FNS and the states. FNS pays the full 
cost of SNAP benefits, shares the states' administrative costs, and is 
responsible for promulgating program regulations and ensuring that 
state officials administer the program in compliance with program 
rules. States administer the program by determining whether households 
meet the program's eligibility requirements, calculating monthly 
benefits for qualified households, and issuing benefits to 
participants through an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) system. 

Program Participation: 

As shown in figure 1, program participation has increased sharply from 
fiscal years 1999 to 2009, and indications are that participation has 
continued to increase significantly in fiscal year 2010. According to 
FNS, the downturn in the U.S. economy, coupled with changes in the 
program's rules and administration, has led to an increase in the 
number of SNAP participants. 

Figure 1: SNAP Participation Has Increased Over the Last Decade: 

[Refer to PDF for image: line graph] 

Fiscal year: 1999; 
Number of participants: 18.2 million. 

Fiscal year: 2000; 
Number of participants: 17.2 million. 

Fiscal year: 2001; 
Number of participants: 17.3 million. 

Fiscal year: 2002; 
Number of participants: 19.1 million. 

Fiscal year: 2003; 
Number of participants: 21.3 million. 

Fiscal year: 2004; 
Number of participants: 23.9 million. 

Fiscal year: 2005; 
Number of participants: 25.7 million. 

Fiscal year: 2006; 
Number of participants: 26.7 million. 

Fiscal year: 2007; 
Number of participants: 26.5 million. 

Fiscal year: 2008; 
Number of participants: 28.4 million. 

Fiscal year: 2009; 
Number of participants: 33.7 million. 

Source: GAO analysis of FNS data. 

[End of figure] 

Determination of Eligibility and Benefits: 

Eligibility for SNAP is based primarily on a household's income and 
assets. To determine a household's eligibility, a caseworker must 
first determine the household's gross income, which cannot exceed 130 
percent of the federal poverty level for that year as determined by 
the Department of Health and Human Services. A household's net income 
cannot exceed 100 percent of the poverty level (or about $22,056 
annually for a family of four living in the continental United States 
in fiscal year 2010). Net income is determined by deducting from gross 
income a portion of expenses such as dependent care costs, medical 
expenses for elderly individuals, utilities costs, and housing 
expenses. 

A household's assets are also considered to determine SNAP eligibility 
and SNAP asset rules are complex. There is a fixed limit, adjusted 
annually for inflation, on the amount of assets a household may own 
and remain eligible for SNAP. Certain assets are not counted, such as 
a home and surrounding lot. There are also basic program rules that 
limit the value of vehicles an applicant can own and still be eligible 
for the program. 

Categorical Eligibility for SNAP: 

Federal regulations require states to make households categorically 
eligible for SNAP if the household receives certain cash benefits, 
such as TANF cash assistance or Supplemental Security Income. States 
must also confer categorical eligibility for certain households 
receiving, or authorized to receive, certain TANF non-cash services 
that are funded with more than 50 percent federal or state maintenance 
of effort (MOE) funds and serve certain TANF purposes.[Footnote 3] In 
addition, in certain circumstances, states have the option to confer 
categorical eligibility using TANF non-cash services funded with less 
than 50 percent federal TANF or state MOE funds. The intent of 
categorical eligibility was to increase program access and reduce the 
administrative burden on state agencies by streamlining the need to 
apply means tests for both TANF and SNAP. 

FNS's Quality Control (QC) System: 

Improper payments (or payment errors) occur when recipients receive 
too much or too little in SNAP benefits. FNS and the states share 
responsibility for implementing an extensive quality control system 
used to measure the accuracy of SNAP payments and from which state and 
national error rates are determined. Under FNS's quality control 
system, the states calculate their payment errors annually by drawing 
a statistical sample to determine whether participating households 
received the correct benefit amount. The state's error rate is 
determined by dividing the dollars paid in error by the state's total 
issuance of SNAP benefits. Once the error rates are final, FNS is 
required to compare each state's performance with the national error 
rate and imposes financial penalties or provides financial incentives 
according to legal specifications.[Footnote 4] 

Trafficking and FNS Authorization and Monitoring of Retailers: 

Trafficking occurs when SNAP recipients exchange SNAP benefits for 
cash instead of food with authorized retailers.[Footnote 5] Under the 
EBT system, SNAP recipients receive an EBT card imprinted with their 
name and a personal account number, and SNAP benefits are 
automatically credited to the recipients' accounts once a month. In 
legitimate SNAP transactions, recipients run their EBT card, which 
works much like a debit card, through an electronic point-of-sale 
machine at the grocery checkout counter, and enter their secret 
personal identification number to access their SNAP accounts. This 
authorizes the transfer of SNAP benefits from a federal account to the 
retailer's account to pay for the eligible food items. The legitimate 
transaction contrasts with a trafficking transaction in which 
recipients swipe their EBT card, but instead of buying groceries, they 
receive a discounted amount of cash and the retailer pockets the 
difference. 

FNS has the primary responsibility for authorizing retailers to 
participate in SNAP. To become an authorized retailer, a store must 
offer, on a continuing basis, at least three varieties of foods in 
each of the four staple food categories--meats, poultry or fish; 
breads or cereals; vegetables or fruits; and dairy products--or over 
50 percent of its sales must be in a staple group. The store owner 
submits an application and includes relevant forms of identification 
such as copies of the owner's Social Security card, driver's license, 
business license, liquor license, and alien resident card. The FNS 
field office program specialist then checks the applicant's Social 
Security number against FNS's database of retailers, the Store 
Tracking and Redemption System, to see if the applicant has previously 
been sanctioned in the SNAP program. The application also collects 
information on the type of business, store hours, number of employees, 
number of cash registers, the types of staple foods offered, and the 
estimated annual amount of gross sales and eligible SNAP sales. 

In addition to approving retailers to participate in the program, FNS 
has the primary responsibility for monitoring their compliance with 
requirements and administratively disqualifying those who are found to 
have trafficked SNAP benefits. FNS headquarters officials collect and 
monitor EBT transaction data to detect suspicious patterns of 
transactions by retailers. They then send any leads to FNS program 
specialists in the field office who either work the cases themselves 
or refer them to undercover investigators in the Retailer 
Investigations Branch to pursue by attempting to traffic SNAP benefits 
for cash. 

States Have Made Significant Progress in Reducing Payment Errors: 

The SNAP Payment Error Rate Has Declined to a Record Low: 

The national payment error rate --the percentage of SNAP benefit 
dollars overpaid or underpaid to program participants--has declined by 
about 56 percent over the last 11 years, from 9.86 percent in 1999 to 
4.36 percent in 2009, in a time of increasing participation (see 
figure 1).[Footnote 6] Of the total $2.19 billion in payment errors in 
fiscal year 2009, $1.8 billion, or about 82 percent, were 
overpayments. Overpayments occur when eligible persons are provided 
more than they are entitled to receive or when ineligible persons are 
provided benefits. Underpayments, which occur when eligible persons 
are paid less than they are entitled to receive, totaled $412 million, 
or about 18 percent of dollars paid in error, in fiscal year 2009. 

Figure 2: SNAP Payment Errors Have Dropped to a Record Low: 

[Refer to PDF for image: multiple line graph] 

Fiscal year: 1999; 
Combined payment error rate: 9.86%; 
Overpayment error rate: 7.01%; 
Underpayment error rate: 2.85%. 

Fiscal year: 2000; 
Combined payment error rate: 8.91%; 
Overpayment error rate: 6.51%; 
Underpayment error rate: 2.4%. 

Fiscal year: 2001; 
Combined payment error rate: 8.66%; 
Overpayment error rate: 6.47%; 
Underpayment error rate: 2.19%. 

Fiscal year: 2002; 
Combined payment error rate: 8.26%; 
Overpayment error rate: 6.16%; 
Underpayment error rate: 2.1%. 

Fiscal year: 2003; 
Combined payment error rate: 6.64%; 
Overpayment error rate: 5.05%; 
Underpayment error rate: 1.59%. 

Fiscal year: 2004; 
Combined payment error rate: 5.88%; 
Overpayment error rate: 4.48%; 
Underpayment error rate: 1.41%. 

Fiscal year: 2005; 
Combined payment error rate: 5.84%; 
Overpayment error rate: 4.53%; 
Underpayment error rate: 1.31%. 

Fiscal year: 2006; 
Combined payment error rate: 5.99%; 
Overpayment error rate: 4.82%; 
Underpayment error rate: 1.17%. 

Fiscal year: 2007; 
Combined payment error rate: 5.64%; 
Overpayment error rate: 4.58%; 
Underpayment error rate: 1.06%. 

Fiscal year: 2008; 
Combined payment error rate: 5.01%; 
Overpayment error rate: 4.01%; 
Underpayment error rate: 1%. 

Fiscal year: 2009; 
Combined payment error rate: 4.36%; 
Overpayment error rate: 3.53%; 
Underpayment error rate: 0.82%. 

Source: GAO analysis of FNS data. 

[End of figure] 

The decline in payment error rates has been widespread despite the 
significant increase in participation. Error rates fell in almost all 
states, and 36 states reduced their error rates by over 50 percent 
from fiscal years 1999 to 2009. In addition, 47 states had error rates 
below 6 percent in 2009; this is an improvement from 1999, when 7 
states had error rates below 6 percent. However, payment error rates 
vary among states. Despite the decrease in many states' error rates, a 
few states continue to have high payment error rates. 

Program Simplification Has Been Shown to Reduce Error Rates, but the 
Program Remains Complex: 

State use of simplified reporting options has been shown to have 
contributed to the reduction in the payment error rate. Several 
options are made available to the states to simplify the application 
and reporting process, and one such option is simplified reporting. 
[Footnote 7] Of the 50 states currently using simplified reporting, 47 
have expanded it beyond earned income households, according to a 
recent FNS report. Once a state has elected to use simplified 
reporting, eligible households in the state need only report changes 
occurring between certification and normally scheduled reporting if 
the changes result in income that exceeds 130 percent of the federal 
poverty level.[Footnote 8] This simplified reporting option can reduce 
a state's error rate by minimizing the number of income changes that 
must be reported between certifications and thereby reducing errors 
associated with caseworker failure to act, as well as participant 
failure to report changes. 

Despite these simplified reporting options, program eligibility 
requirements remain complex. This complexity increases the risk that 
caseworkers will make errors when considering all the factors needed 
to determine eligibility. Our previous work has shown that the 
financial eligibility of an applicant can be difficult to verify in 
means-tested programs, further increasing the risk of payment to an 
ineligible recipient.[Footnote 9] For example, caseworkers must verify 
several types of household assets to determine eligibility and benefit 
amounts, such as bank accounts, property, and vehicles. While 
additional efforts to simplify the program may further reduce payment 
error, it could also reduce FNS' ability to target the program to 
individual families' needs. Moreover, participant-caused errors, which 
we earlier reported constitute one-third of the overall national 
errors, are difficult to prevent. 

FNS and States Have Taken Steps to Increase Payment Accuracy: 

We found that FNS and the states we reviewed have taken many 
approaches to increasing SNAP payment accuracy, most of which are 
consistent with internal control practices known to reduce improper 
payments.[Footnote 10] Often, several practices are tried 
simultaneously, making it difficult to determine which have been the 
most effective. 

* Tracking state performance. FNS staff use Quality Control (QC) data 
to monitor states' performance over time; conduct annual reviews of 
state operations; and where applicable, monitor the states' 
implementation of corrective action plans.[Footnote 11] FNS, in turn, 
requires states to perform management evaluations to monitor whether 
adequate corrective action plans are in place at local offices to 
address the causes of persistent errors and deficiencies. In addition, 
in November 2003, FNS created a Payment Accuracy Branch at the 
national level to work with FNS regional offices to suggest policy and 
program changes and to monitor state performance. The branch 
facilitates a National Payment Accuracy Work Group with 
representatives from each FNS regional office and headquarters who use 
QC data to review and categorize state performance into one of three 
tiers.[Footnote 12] Increased intervention and monitoring approaches 
are applied when state error rates increase and states are assigned to 
tier 2 or tier 3. 

* Penalties and incentives. FNS has long focused its attention on 
states' accountability for error rates through its QC system by 
assessing financial penalties and providing financial incentives. 
However, since 2000, USDA leadership has more explicitly established 
payment accuracy as a program priority. High level USDA officials 
visited states with particularly high error rates, and FNS has 
collected a higher percentage of penalties from states compared with 
prior years. For example, from fiscal year 1992 to 2000, FNS collected 
about $800,000 in penalties from states. In the next 5 years, FNS 
collected more than $20 million from states. 

In fiscal year 2009, 3 states (Maine, West Virginia, and New Mexico) 
were notified that they had incurred a financial liability for having 
a poor payment error rate for at least two consecutive years. An 
additional 9 states and territories (Connecticut, Maryland, Indiana, 
Wisconsin, Louisiana, Texas, Iowa, Alaska, and Guam) were found to be 
in jeopardy of being penalized if their error rates do not improve. 
Ten states and territories received bonus payments for the best and 
most improved payment error rates in fiscal year 2009 (Delaware, 
Florida, Georgia, Guam, Maine, Nebraska, Ohio, South Dakota, 
Washington, Wisconsin). 

* Information sharing. FNS also provides and facilitates the exchange 
of information gleaned from monitoring by training state QC staff, 
presenting at conferences, publishing best practice guides, supporting 
the adoption of program simplification options, and providing states 
policy interpretation and guidance. 

At the time of our 2005 study, states we reviewed adopted a 
combination of practices to prevent, minimize, and address payment 
accuracy problems, such as: 

* Increasing the awareness of, and the accountability for, payment 
error. For example, some states set error rate targets for their local 
offices and hold staff accountable for payment accuracy. 

* Analyzing quality control data to identify causes of common payment 
errors and developing corrective actions. 

* Making automated system changes to prompt workers to obtain complete 
documentation from clients. 

* Developing specialized change units that focus on acting upon 
reported case changes. 

* Verifying the accuracy of benefit payments calculated by state SNAP 
workers through supervisory and other types of case file reviews. 

Despite this progress, the amount of SNAP benefits paid in error is 
substantial, totaling about $2.2 billion in 2009. This necessitates 
continued top-level attention from USDA management and continued 
federal and state commitment to determining the causes of improper 
payments and taking corrective actions to reduce them. 

Estimates Suggest Trafficking Has Declined, but FNS Could Further 
Enhance Program Integrity: 

FNS Estimates Suggest That the Rate of SNAP Trafficking Has Declined: 

The national rate of SNAP trafficking declined from about 3.8 cents 
per dollar of benefits redeemed in 1993 to about 1.0 cent per dollar 
during the years 2002 to 2005, as shown in table 1. However, even at 
that lower rate, FNS estimates that about $241 million in SNAP 
benefits were trafficked annually in those years. FNS has not 
completed an updated estimate of trafficking since 2005. 

Table 1: FNS Estimates Suggest That the Trafficking Rate Has Declined: 

Millions of dollars: 

Calendar year period: 1993; 
Estimated trafficking rate percentage: 3.8%; 
SNAP benefits issued annually: $21,100; 
Estimated amount of benefits trafficked annually: $812. 

Calendar year period: 1996-1998; 
Estimated trafficking rate percentage: 3.5%; 
SNAP benefits issued annually: $19,627[A]; 
Estimated amount of benefits trafficked annually: $657. 

Calendar year period: 1999-2002; 
Estimated trafficking rate percentage: 2.5%; 
SNAP benefits issued annually: $16,139[A]; 
Estimated amount of benefits trafficked annually: $393. 

Calendar year period: 2002-2005; 
Estimated trafficking rate percentage: 1.0%; 
SNAP benefits issued annually: $23,213[A]; 
Estimated amount of benefits trafficked annually: $241. 

Source: FNS studies and GAO calculation. 

[A] FNS reported that it annualized redemption data over the period of 
the study but did not provide the annualized figures. We calculated 
the 3 and 4 year average of benefits redeemed for comparative purposes. 

Note: The data from 2002-2005 are the most recent available. 

[End of table] 

Overall, we found that the estimated rate of trafficking at small 
stores was much higher than the estimated rate for supermarkets and 
large groceries, which redeem most SNAP benefits. The rate of 
trafficking in small stores was an estimated 7.6 cents per dollar and 
an estimated 0.2 cents per dollar in large stores in 2005. 

FNS Has Used EBT Data to Improve Retailer Monitoring: 

With the implementation of EBT, FNS has supplemented its traditional 
undercover investigations by the Retailer Investigations Branch with 
cases developed by analyzing EBT transaction data. The nationwide 
implementation of EBT, completed in 2004, has given FNS powerful new 
tools to supplement its traditional undercover investigations of 
retailers suspected of trafficking SNAP benefits. FNS traditionally 
sent its investigators into stores numerous times over a period of 
months to attempt to traffic benefits. However, in 1996 Congress gave 
FNS the authority to charge retailers with trafficking in cases using 
evidence obtained through an EBT transaction report,[Footnote 13] 
called "paper cases." A major advantage of paper cases is that they 
can be prepared relatively quickly and without multiple store visits. 

These EBT cases now account for more than half of the permanent 
disqualifications by FNS. Although the number of trafficking 
disqualifications based on undercover investigations has declined, 
these investigations continue to play a key role in combating 
trafficking. However, as FNS's ability to detect trafficking has 
improved, the number of suspected traffickers investigated by other 
federal entities, such as the USDA Inspector General and the U.S. 
Secret Service, declined, according to data available at the time of 
our review. These entities have focused more on a smaller number of 
high-impact investigations. As a result, retailers who traffic are 
less likely to face criminal penalties or prosecution.[Footnote 14] 

FNS Has Taken Action to Improve Retailer Monitoring and Increase 
Trafficking Penalties: 

In response to our prior recommendation that FNS improves analysis and 
monitoring, FNS has implemented new technology to improve its ability 
to detect trafficking and disqualify retailers who traffic, which has 
contributed to more sophisticated analyses of SNAP transactions and 
categorization of stores based on risk. Specifically, FNS implemented 
a revised store classification system to systematically compare 
similar stores in order to better identify fraudulent transaction 
activity for investigation. FNS also increased the amount of data 
available to review and changed its monitoring of transaction data 
from reviewing monthly data to reviewing these data on a daily basis. 
FNS also implemented a new tool that assesses each retailer's risk of 
trafficking. FNS reports that these changes have assisted with early 
monitoring and identification of violating stores and allocation of 
its monitoring resources. 

Consistent with our recommendation that FNS develop a strategy to 
increase penalties for trafficking, FNS received new authority to 
impose increased financial penalties for trafficking. The Food, 
Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 expanded FNS authority to assess 
civil money penalties in addition to or in lieu of disqualification 
[Footnote 15]. It also provided authority for FNS, in consultation 
with the Office of the Inspector General, to withhold funds from 
traffickers during the administrative process, if such trafficking is 
considered a flagrant violation. Regulations to implement this 
provision are being developed and FNS expects the proposed rule to be 
published in July 2012. According to FNS, the rule that will address 
addition of monetary sanctions to disqualification is targeted for 
publication in September 2011. Until the policy is implemented, the 
impact of this change will not be known. 

Despite Progress, Vulnerabilities Still Exist: 

Despite the progress FNS has made in combating retailer trafficking, 
the SNAP program remains vulnerable. 

Program vulnerabilities we identified include: 

* Limited inspection of stores. FNS authorizes some stores with 
limited food supplies so that low-income participants in areas with 
few supermarkets have access to food, but may not inspect these stores 
again for 5 years unless there is some indication of a problem. 

* Varied state efforts. Some states actively pursue and disqualify 
recipients who traffic their benefits while inaction by other states 
allow recipients suspected of trafficking to continue the practice. We 
recommended in our October 2006 report that FNS promote state efforts 
to pursue recipients suspected of trafficking by revisiting the 
incentive structure to incorporate additional provisions to encourage 
states to investigate and take action against recipients who traffic. 
We also recommended that FNS ensure that field offices report to 
states those recipients who are suspected of trafficking with 
disqualified retailers. However, FNS officials told us they have taken 
few recent steps to increase state efforts to pursue recipients 
suspected of trafficking, in part because of state resource 
constraints, but will continue to examine the impact of financial 
incentives in preparation for the expected upcoming program 
reauthorization. 

States Can Provide Automatic SNAP Eligibility to Individuals 
Authorized to Receive TANF Services: 

Many States Confer Categorical Eligibility Using No Asset Limit and 
Income Limits Above Regular SNAP Rules: 

States that confer TANF non-cash categorical eligibility use a variety 
of TANF services to qualify participants for SNAP benefits. According 
to FNS, as of June 2010, 36 states are using broad-based policies that 
could make most, if not all, TANF non-cash households categorically 
eligible for SNAP because the households receive TANF/MOE funded 
benefits, such as brochures or information referral services. This is 
an increase from the 29 states that conferred this type of categorical 
eligibility at the time of our 2007 report. Other states have more 
narrow policies in place that could make a smaller number of 
households categorically eligible for SNAP because they receive a 
TANF/MOE funded benefit such as child care or counseling. 

These categorically eligible households do not need to meet SNAP 
eligibility requirements such as the SNAP asset or gross income test 
because their general need has been established by the TANF program. 
For example, in 35 of the states that confer categorical eligibility 
for all TANF services, there is no limit on the amount of assets a 
household may have to be determined eligible, according to a FNS 
report. In addition, the gross income limit of the TANF program set by 
these states ranged from 130 to 200 percent of the federal poverty 
level, according to a FNS report. As a result, households with 
substantial assets but low income could be deemed eligible for SNAP 
under these policies. 

Even though households may be deemed categorically eligible for SNAP, 
the amount of assistance households are eligible for is determined 
based on each household's income and other circumstances using the 
same process used for other SNAP recipients. Some families determined 
categorically eligible for the program could be found eligible for the 
minimum benefit. However, FNS noted in a recent report that families 
with incomes above 130 percent of the federal poverty level and high 
expenses (shelter costs, dependent care expenses, and medical costs) 
could receive a significant SNAP benefit. 

Households can be categorically eligible for SNAP even if they receive 
no TANF funded service other than a toll-free telephone number or 
informational brochure. For example, one state reported to FNS that it 
included information about a pregnancy prevention hotline on the SNAP 
application to confer categorical eligibility. Other states reported 
providing households brochures with information about available 
services, such as domestic violence assistance or marriage classes, to 
confer categorical eligibility. Receipt of the information on the SNAP 
applications or on the brochures can qualify the household to be 
categorically eligible for SNAP benefits. However, the amount of the 
SNAP benefit is still determined in accordance with SNAP rules by the 
eligibility workers using information on income and expenses. 

In 2007, we reported that six states may not have been following 
program regulations because they were not using certain TANF noncash 
services to confer SNAP categorical eligibility.[Footnote 16] These 
services included child care, transportation, and substance abuse 
services, which may have been funded by more than 50 percent federal 
TANF or state MOE funds. In addition, some states reported that they 
did not specifically determine whether an individual needs a specific 
TANF noncash service before conferring SNAP eligibility. We 
recommended that FNS provide guidance and technical assistance to 
states clarifying which TANF noncash services states must use to 
confer categorical eligibility for SNAP and monitor states' compliance 
with categorical eligibility requirements. In September 2009, USDA 
released a memorandum encouraging states to continue promoting noncash 
categorical eligibility. FNS reported that four of the six states 
currently are using the required noncash services to confer 
categorical eligibility. 

FNS and States Cite Several Advantages to Use of Expanded Categorical 
Eligibility: 

FNS has encouraged states to adopt categorical eligibility to improve 
program access and simplify the administration of SNAP. According to 
FNS officials, increased use of categorical eligibility by states has 
reduced administrative burdens and increased access to SNAP benefits 
to households who would not otherwise be eligible for the program due 
to SNAP income or asset limits. Adoption of this policy option can 
provide needed assistance to low-income families, simplify state 
policies, reduce the amount of time states must devote to verifying 
assets, and reduce the potential for errors, according to FNS. FNS 
recently also encouraged states that have implemented a broad-based 
categorical eligibility program with an asset limit to exclude 
refundable tax credits from consideration as assets. 

In our previous work, we found that many of the states' SNAP officials 
surveyed believed eliminating TANF non-cash categorical eligibility 
would decrease participation in SNAP.[Footnote 17] Many of the states' 
SNAP officials we surveyed also believed that eliminating TANF non-
cash categorical eligibility would increase the SNAP administrative 
workload and state administrative costs. Some common reasons state 
officials indicated for the increase in SNAP administrative workload 
were: 

* increase in verifications needed, 

* increase in error rates as required verifications increase, 

* changes to data systems, 

* increase in time to process applications, and: 

* changes to policies and related materials. 

While FNS and the states believe categorical eligibility has improved 
program access and payment accuracy, the extent of its impact on 
access and program integrity is unclear. 

Concluding Observations: 

Over the past few years, the size of the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program has grown substantially, both in terms of the 
number of people served and the amount paid out in benefits, at a time 
when the slow pace of the economic recovery has left many families 
facing extended hardship. At the same time, due largely to the efforts 
of FNS working with the states, payment errors have declined and 
mechanisms for detecting and reducing trafficking have improved. 
However, little is known about the extent to which increased use of 
categorical eligibility has affected the integrity of the program. 
Further, improper payments in the program continue to exceed $2 
billion and retailer fraud remains a serious concern, highlighting the 
importance of continued vigilance in ensuring that improvements in 
program access are appropriately balanced with efforts to maintain 
program integrity. As current fiscal stress and looming deficits 
continue to limit the amount of assistance available to needy 
families, it is more important than ever that scarce federal resources 
are targeted to those who are most in need and that the federal 
government ensure that every federal dollar is spent as intended. 

Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I will be happy to 
answer any questions you or members of the Subcommittee may have. 

Contact and Acknowledgments: 

For future contacts regarding this testimony, please contact Kay Brown 
at (202) 512-7215 or e-mail brownke@gao.gov. Key contributors to this 
testimony were Kathy Larin, Cathy Roark, and Alex Galuten. 

[End of section] 

Related GAO Products: 

Domestic Food Assistance: Complex System Benefits Millions, but 
Additional Efforts Could Address Potential Inefficiency and Overlap 
among Smaller Programs. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-10-346]. Washington, D.C.: April 15, 
2010. 

Improper Payments: Progress Made but Challenges Remain in Estimating 
and Reducing Improper Payments. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-628T]. Washington, D.C.: April 22, 
2009. 

Food Stamp Program: FNS Could Improve Guidance and Monitoring to Help 
Ensure Appropriate Use of Noncash Categorical Eligibility. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-465]. Washington, D.C.: March 28, 
2007. 

Food Stamp Program: Payment Errors and Trafficking Have Declined 
despite Increased Program Participation. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-422T]. Washington, D.C.: January 
31, 2007. 

Food Stamp Trafficking: FNS Could Enhance Program Integrity by Better 
Targeting Stores Likely to Traffic and Increasing Penalties. 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-53]. Washington, D.C.: 
October 13, 2006. 

Improper Payments: Federal and State Coordination Needed to Report 
National Improper Payment Estimates on Federal Programs. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-06-347]. Washington, D.C.: April 14, 
2006. 

Food Stamp Program: States Have Made Progress Reducing Payment Errors, 
and Further Challenges Remain. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-05-245]. Washington, D.C.: May 5, 2005. 

Food Stamp Program: Farm Bill Options Ease Administrative Burden, but 
Opportunities Exist to Streamline Participant Reporting Rules among 
Programs. [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-04-916]. 
Washington, D.C.: September 16, 2004. 

Food Stamp Program: States Have Made Progress Reducing Payment Errors, 
and Further Challenges Remain. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-05-245]. Washington, D.C.: May 5, 2005. 

[End of section] 

Footnotes: 

[1] Pub. L. No. 111-5, § 101 (2009). 

[2] GAO, Food Stamp Program: States Have Made Progress Reducing 
Payment Errors, and Further Challenges Remain, [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-05-245] (Washington, D.C.: May 5, 
2005); GAO, Food Stamp Trafficking: FNS Could Enhance Program 
Integrity by Better Targeting Stores Likely to Traffic and Increasing 
Penalties, [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-53] 
(Washington, D.C.: Oct. 13, 2006). GAO, Food Stamp Program: FNS Could 
Improve Guidance and Monitoring to Help Ensure Appropriate Use of 
Noncash Categorical Eligibility, [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-465] (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 28, 
2007). 

[3] TANF funding includes both TANF block grant and state maintenance 
of effort (MOE) funds - nonfederal funds that states are required to 
spend in order to receive the entire federal TANF block grant. FNS 
regulations state that households in which all members are receiving 
benefits or services from a program designed to meet the program goals 
of TANF and which are funded with more than 50 percent of federal TANF 
or state maintenance of effort funds are generally categorically 
eligible for SNAP. A state may, at its discretion, in certain 
circumstances, confer categorical eligibility to households in which 
all members are receiving similar benefits or services from a program 
funded with less than 50 percent federal TANF or state maintenance of 
effort funds. 

[4] The SNAP error rate is calculated for the entire program, as well 
as every state, and is based on overpayments to those who are eligible 
for smaller benefits, overpayments to those who are not eligible for 
any benefit, and underpayments to those who do not get as much as they 
should. 

[5] In fiscal year 2009, about 190,000 retailers were authorized to 
accept SNAP benefits. 

[6] Our 2003 analysis of FNS' quality control data found that almost 
two-thirds of SNAP payment errors are caused by caseworkers, usually 
when they fail to act on new information or when they make mistakes 
when applying program rules, and one-third are caused by participants, 
when they unintentionally or intentionally do not report needed 
information or provide incomplete or incorrect information. 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-05-245]. We did not update 
this analysis for this testimony. 

[7] The Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (2002 Farm 
Bill) also gave states the option of adopting provisions that could 
simplify program administration and possibly reduce error rates. These 
options include simplifying income and resources, housing costs, 
deductions, reporting requirements, and utility allowances. Pub. L. 
No. 107-171, Title IV (2002). See GAO, Food Stamp Program: Farm Bill 
Options Ease Administrative Burden, but Opportunities Exist to 
Streamline Participant Reporting Rules among Programs, [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-04-916] (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 16, 
2004). 

[8] Households subject to reporting on a periodic basis must submit 
reports not less often than once every 6 months. 

[9] See GAO, Improper Payments: Progress Made but Challenges Remain in 
Estimating and Reducing Improper Payments. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-628T]. Washington, D.C.: April 22, 
2009. 

[10] See GAO, Strategies to Manage Improper Payments: Learning From 
Public and Private Sector Organizations, [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-02-69G] (Washington, D.C.: October 
2001). 

[11] States with error rates of 6 percent or more are required to 
develop and implement corrective action plans to improve payment 
accuracy that are monitored by the FNS regional offices. 

[12] Tier 1 states have an error rate under 6 percent, and tier 2 
states have an error rate of 6 percent or greater but do not fall into 
tier 3. States are assigned to tier 3 when the lower limit of their 
error rate estimate at the 90 percent confidence level is higher than 
105 percent of the national error rate estimate. 

[13] Pub. L. No. 104-193, § 841 (1996). 

[14] On top of civil penalties, retailers who traffic may be 
permanently disqualified from participating in the program. A civil 
penalty may be imposed in lieu of permanent disqualification, however, 
in certain circumstances in which the store owner was not aware of and 
was not involved in the trafficking. In addition, individuals who are 
determined to have intentionally committed an act in violation of the 
SNAP statutes (such as by trafficking) lose eligibility to participate 
in the program for a specified period of time, depending on the 
circumstances. There are also potential criminal penalties (including 
fines and possible imprisonment) for knowingly trafficking. 

[15] Pub. L. No. 110-234, § 4132 (2008). 

[16] [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-465].  

[18] Our analysis of data from states in 2006 showed that a vast 
majority of TANF noncash households may remain eligible for SNAP 
benefits without noncash categorical eligibility because their income 
and/or asset levels are within the regular SNAP limits. Other 
households may lose eligibility for SNAP because their income and/or 
asset levels are too high. [hyperlink, 
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-07-465]. 

[End of section] 

GAO's Mission: 

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and 
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting 
its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance 
and accountability of the federal government for the American people. 
GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and 
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance 
to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding 
decisions. GAO's commitment to good government is reflected in its core 
values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. 

Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony: 

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no 
cost is through GAO's Web site [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov]. Each 
weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and 
correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly 
posted products every afternoon, go to [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov] 
and select "E-mail Updates." 

Order by Phone: 

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO’s actual cost of
production and distribution and depends on the number of pages in the
publication and whether the publication is printed in color or black and
white. Pricing and ordering information is posted on GAO’s Web site, 
[hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm]. 

Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077, or
TDD (202) 512-2537. 

Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card,
MasterCard, Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional 
information. 

To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs: 

Contact: 

Web site: [hyperlink, http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm]: 
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov: 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470: 

Congressional Relations: 

Ralph Dawn, Managing Director, dawnr@gao.gov: 
(202) 512-4400: 
U.S. Government Accountability Office: 
441 G Street NW, Room 7125: 
Washington, D.C. 20548: 

Public Affairs: 

Chuck Young, Managing Director, youngc1@gao.gov: 
(202) 512-4800: 
U.S. Government Accountability Office: 
441 G Street NW, Room 7149: 
Washington, D.C. 20548: 		
		
